\section{Intended Audience}

The main target audience for this master thesis are researchers within
the field of distributed systems, specifically those whose field of
study is peer-to-peer (P2P) decentralised networks and the
Publish-Subscribe paradigm. But any computer science student with a
healthy interest in the field should be able to both understand and
benefit from reading this thesis.


\section{Motivation for Thesis}

The Publish-Subscribe (pub/sub) communication paradigm is receiving an
increasing amount of attention from the research community, as it
provides a loosely coupled and scalable interaction scheme suitable for
large-scale distributed systems~\cite{Eugster:2003}. It has also shown
to be a useful approach for several business applications such as
financial data dissemination~\cite{tibcorv} and application
integration~\cite{goops}.  Topic-based pub/sub has also seen more novel
applications such as decentralised social networks. More specifically,
the issue of delivering notifications in such a network is a task
especially suited for this approach. This motivates further
investigation into such systems, comparing their performance and
analysing their characteristics and shortcomings.

In~\cite{Setty:2012}, we provided a mini-survey of several existing
state-of-the-art topic-based pub/sub systems, illustrating their
different characteristics and highlighting their shortcomings. However,
there is a need for an ever deeper evaluation and comparisons of these
systems, and we feel such a comparison would be a great contribution to
the research community.

\section{Problem Statement}

\section{Chapter Overview}

The following is a brief overview of the chapters included in this
thesis:

\begin{description}
    \item[Chapter~\ref{ch:background}] \hfill \\

        In this chapter, we explain key concepts and describe the tools
        and technologies we use in the work presented in this thesis.
        This chapter is meant to serve as a brief overview of relevant
        topics and should prove useful in order to fully understand and
        appreciate the work presented in this thesis.

    \item[Chapter~\ref{ch:design-challenges}] \hfill \\

        We extend the mini-survey found in~\cite{Setty:2012} with a
        where we analyze several other protocols than what is included
        in~\cite{Setty:2012}. This chapter should be helpful in order to
        understand the different challenges researchers face when
        designing such systems. In particular it focuses on what
        trade-offs must be considered, and what are the advantages and
        drawbacks of certain design decisions.

    \item[Chapter~\ref{ch:vizpub}] \hfill \\

        We describe \demo, a tool we propose for visualizing the
        performance of overlay-based pub/sub systems. The chapter
        includes descriptions of the system architecture, as well as
        examples of visualizations. Also, we describe our experiences
        using the tool in order to further demonstrate its benefits both
        for researchers, developers as well as students.

    \item[Chapter~\ref{ch:evaluation}] \hfill \\

       We use \demo~in order to expand the evaluation performed
       in~\cite{Setty:2012} on a particular set of topology metrics. Our
       tool enable us to easily add these metrics to the evaluation, as
       the algorithm for calculating these properties of the overlay are
       included in the Gephi framework.

        % Use vizpub as a tool for evaluating experiments. We update both
        % poldercast and scribe, in order to expand the evaluation
        % performed in the poldercast paper. Emphasize how the vizpub tool
        % along with the gephi framework enable us to easily expand the
        % evaluation on particular metrics, as these are inlcuded in
        % gephi. These metrics include, in-degree, out-degree, clustering
        % coefficient and centralities.

    \item[Chapter~\ref{ch:conclusion-and-future-work}] \hfill \\

        The final chapter summarizes the contributions of this thesis.
        We discuss our results, as well as the future of \demo. We also
        discuss what are the major challenges moving forward, and how
        the tool could be expanded. It is our hope that this tool will
        prove useful for the research community in the future.

        % Emphasize how future evaluations could be expanded by
        % implementing statistics plugins in gephi, as well as extending
        % the reporter interface. This enables researcher to more easily
        % share their work, no more one-off code! Also, a vizpub plugin
        % for gephi might be a good idea. This could provide a panel in
        % gephi which could display global metrics such as hit-ratio,
        % instead of displaying them as a label on every node. Also, this
        % plugin could display the current reporter interval being
        % visualized, as this is hard to derive from the timeline with
        % several hundred intervals.

\end{description}
